if you eat more than 20 of your calories
from protein it is going to cause a four
times higher increase in all-cause
mortality
hey everyone welcome to health theory
today's guest is dave asprey is back for
round two and if you don't know dave he
is the silicon valley tech entrepreneur
and new york times bestselling author of
several books including headstrong game
changers and most recently super human
he's also one of the world's most famous
biohackers the founder and ceo of
bulletproof and the host of the top 10
podcast bulletproof radio
dave welcome back
it's always fun to come to your house
and see the amazing stuff you're working
on thank you for having me of course and
speaking of working on man you and i
share an obsession with the new book
you're
living to 180 so your book opens with
one of my favorite quotes of all time
which is do not go gently into that good
night rage rage rage against the dying
of the light
why start there how has this become your
obsession
it's funny there's a very old
restaurant in berkeley california in
fact
my parents uh used to eat there my mom
was pregnant with me like way back in
the day it's called spanglers
and they actually have that quote up in
when you enter into the restaurant there
so i remember when i was a little kid my
grandfather
reading that quote to me
and i remember my grandfather was
passing away he was in his
in his 80s and he came down with an
autoimmune kidney condition and he sat
down and he said well i'm a phd
scientist chemist
and i know that if i work really hard
i might get to the point where i can sit
at home and be well enough to watch golf
and do dialysis twice a week for the
rest of my life
i don't want that so i'm going on the
wine diet
and
he said call the family and he said what
does that mean he said i'm only having
wine no water no nothing else so
everyone flew in and he passed away a
few days later literally doing exactly
what he said he just had a few sips of
wine whenever he wanted to but he
decided he was going to go let's talk
about that for a second so i'm i'm
actually really interested in this so
um like if i
knew that that was a one-way street
as much as i want to live forever 180
like as long as humanly possible if it
got to the end man i'm i'm all about the
wine diet or
euthanasia quite frankly like where do
you come down on that
if you think that there's hope and you
think that there's hope to have the
quality of life that you want then you
fight for it and in fact one of these
guys who never discloses publicly ceo of
a fortune 200 company he was diagnosed
with pancreatic cancer the same stuff
that took out
steve jobs
and i sat down at the rosewood hotel
and uh he said dave i'm gonna tell you
what i did and the day he was diagnosed
he said i'm not gonna die i have i have
a company and i have kids this isn't
fair he never told anyone so he went on
a full keto diet that day
and he
shrunk his tumor to the point that it
became operable they did chemo on it and
when the doctors weren't looking to
inject insulin to do insulin potentiated
therapy which works way better than
chemotherapy but the doctors wouldn't do
and so he's like i'm taking charge and
you know what he he did it right so and
i and
in running an annotation nonprofit group
for 20 years i have met people who are
saying i have this life-threatening
condition and i am going to own this and
they do and i've also met with i'm going
to own this in a certain point they go
it's not working and they make peace
with it and the people who die kicking
and screaming are the most unhappy and
if you believe any of the buddhist
perspectives on hell or any of those
other things like that those are the
people who have probably a shitty
afterlife and aren't going to like their
next life if you're into reincarnation
do you believe in that absolutely really
yeah that's so interesting how did you
get into that like when did that become
your dominant belief system there's the
western side of this so i grew up as in
a in an atheist household full of
rigorous engineers and you know like
only stupid people would believe that
stuff
but here's what it comes down to
if your nervous system believes
that you get to you get a game over at
the end of this game you relax a lot
more
okay
okay so so check this out if i can do
anything to remove my unconscious fear
of death which inhibits me from doing
the things that i want to do when i'm
here
if believing reincarnation can do that
fine i'll sign up for it because here's
the deal if i'm right
great if i'm wrong i'm dead i don't care
like
you can't lose by believing in
reincarnation so i can't tell you that
it's provable i've also done very deep
states of neurofeedback i've done deep
stuff shamanic-wise and i've talked to
different people from different
traditions who look at me and say the
same things about stuff that i have no
knowledge of
so
as a curious person where that
scientific method is observe is the
first step i've observed stuff i can't
explain via
any normal hypothesis so i know the
stuff that we believe has holes in it
just like it does biologically so i'm
just going to say i like that choice
best because even if it's complete
[__] it still enhances my quality of
life that's really interesting so
one the reason that uh the one thing and
all that that doesn't resonate with me
is that believing that you get a game
over at the end of this causes you to
relax which is the exact opposite i
would say certainly for me
even if i live forever like i want to go
hard hard hard every day and if there's
an end then i really want to go hard
every day whereas i feel like the the
opposite might be true if i knew i were
getting reincarnated
one of my lives might be the donut life
where i just chill and i'm like look i'm
gonna tap out early i get it but
i'm just gonna eat me some tasty food
until it comes if you believe so i went
to tibet to learn meditation from the
masters like i've debated the llamas and
what they'll tell you is oh you've
probably done that
had the donut life you mean yeah
absolutely if you're asking that
question now you probably already had
your donut life right right so the idea
is you're going to keep making the same
mistakes for lifetime after lifetime
after lifetime until you learn your
lesson so for me that's pretty good
motivation to learn my lesson this time
so i have to repeat the lesson again
because who wants to read first grade
over and over and over eventually that's
going to get boring
all right so while we have this one and
this isn't our doughnut life then what
should we be doing like i love the
concept that you explore in the book
about okay you may be here and maybe
here is even pretty good but there
actually is something above that and
that you're not kidding when you say
that you really want to live to 180. how
do we actually get there like
walk us through the you call it the the
four killers sure start there
and
everything in superhuman comes down to
something called return on investment
and it you just have to look at what
you're investing and we usually think of
investment as dollars but what we're
really investing is not even time we're
investing energy
because if you have energy you can use
the energy to make money if you have
time but no energy the time is useless
if you have money but no energy the
money is mostly useless unless you spend
it to get your energy back which is what
i had to do when i weighed 300 pounds
and you know i was i was screwed up
so
if you don't have money you don't have
time to have energy you're in pretty
desperate straights so
when it comes to living 180 what if
during this entire life however long it
is you did the things that gave you the
highest return on investment for
learning the lessons that you need to
learn whether because this is the only
life you have and you tricked yourself
into believing reincarnation so your
heart rate variability to go higher or
because you actually are going to come
back in our life i have no idea but i'm
good either way so just in case i think
living to at least 180 is a good plan it
lets me do more of the fun stuff
and when we get down to what's in
superhuman first step to living 180 is
not dying
so
it sounds kind of obvious but
a lot of people read that book oh i
never thought about it but let's just
play the odds if you're average by the
way okay if you're listening to the show
you're already not average because
you're paying attention to health right
and if you're reading superhuman you're
not average but if you are average
what's going to kill you is probably
heart disease cancer
or alzheimer's disease or diabetes and
diabetes turned out as a risk factor for
the other three so
pretty much that's your future you're
going to be unable to metabolize food
until you puff up and die of a sugar
overload and other diseases that's no
good you're going to pop a gasket your
heart will stop eating
or you could just forget your name your
kids names and end up in diapers and
cancer we all know you know chemical
poisoning radiation poisoning surgery
and what no one talks about though is
that your chances of living if you had
cancer are twice as high now as they
used to be so we're actually
not preventing cancer very well the
incidence is higher but the survival
rate is increasing pretty dramatically
right so
i
i end up looking at all these and saying
okay what do we do the basic things to
avoid your risk of all of those because
if you just turn that down your quality
of life is unquestionably going to be
higher even if you die at 87 or whatever
the average would be given your
demographics
and then once you've lowered those risks
you say all right what are the things
that are going to make me die of some
other cause and maybe one of these and
for those there's these seven pillars of
aging that now scientists understand we
used to think oh we don't know why we
age we age because of time you know we
age because of
whatever but it's not one thing
and it's sort of like why does your car
break
well is it because you didn't change the
oil you didn't put gas in the tank you
didn't change the tires you didn't
rotate the timing belt and all the other
stuff you do to maintain a car and did
you do it the right time throughout the
life of the car if you do it right
there's cars with 700 000 miles on them
and driving today and there's cars in
the junkyard with 70 000 miles right i'd
like this to be a 700 000 mile car it
might have a few wrinkles in the seats
but it's perfectly serviceable and it
gets around under its own power and this
is doable but only if you know the
maintenance schedule so the seven
pillars in superhuman are about those
for each of the pillars
there's things you can do that are free
that are lifestyle based there's things
you can do that are pretty cheap
like maybe change your diet a little bit
or
take a supplement
a small gadget let's say and then there
are things that are based on the very
cutting edge science some of them are
frighteningly expensive but this is what
the millionaires are doing
and i went to the trouble of going out
and doing as many of those as i could
afford or find
and
those things are are in here so here's
the experience of doing it here's you
know an expert here's you know my own
assessment of this
and here's the results i had and what i
want people to walk away from this
interview from reading the book just
from thinking about this
aging is death by a thousand cuts and
these seven pillars are what are holding
you up but what if you took less cuts
they were less deep and then you healed
those cuts like wolverine
instead of just putting band-aids on
them you'll find that when you're old
you have a lot less scars
and you function a lot better and
actually you're not old you just have
lots of years and that is the path that
i'm on and it's an accessible achievable
path for everyone
so one of the things you talk about in
the book i was actually
excited to see that you put it into a
nice simple sentence and basically aging
boils down to the mitochondria yeah and
i've never heard anybody put such a fine
point on it before one for people that
don't know what are mitochondria and
then two why is aging so related to that
mitochondria are we like say the power
plants of the cells this is seventh
grade biology it's what you hear on
every new show but uh i went really deep
on the biology of these ancient bacteria
that we like to say we harnessed for
ourselves they're actually running a lot
of the decisions in our bodies they're
the ones who run the operating system of
life for us and the operating system of
life is run away from kill or hide from
scary things they decide how much energy
goes into fight or flight and how much
goes into cellular protein folding
they're making the electrons and
deciding what to do with them and
they're keenly interested in food
because without food their job is to
take
food and air and a little bit of light
and make energy out of that and if they
don't get enough of those things they
freak out and they change their
behaviors that changes your behaviors
and mitochondria because the way you're
talking about them make them sound like
they're a separate entity and they
actually do have their own dna right
they are separate bacteria that are now
inside our cells they have their own dna
and they share some functions with our
dna but after this book came out when i
said very straightforward mitochondria
are at the root of aging and one of the
seven pillars is mitochondrial
mutation however their performance
determines how well you live then the
study came out and what they found was
profound they found that when
mitochondria make enough energy that the
energy gets used by
your nuclear dna repair facilities so if
you have enough energy in your cells
because you ate the right stuff because
you did the right stuff like sleep and
exercise the right way and all the other
things that i talk about in here you
will have enough energy to repair your
human dna not your mitochondrial dna so
if you don't want to get cancer you
don't want to get these mutations over
time you've got to have enough energy to
repair and this is what's happening to a
lot of us when i say a lot of us 48 of
people under age 40 have mitochondrial
insufficiency everyone over age 40 has
mitochondrial insufficiency unless
they're managing it how do you test for
that
it just so happens that upgrade labs
we have the gold standard test in fact
we're the only ones who have it we have
exclusive rights to it and you use a vo2
mask and it actually measures your
oxygen consumption and how efficient you
are at using it there are other blood
testing all that are
just not that reliable i've been
searching for a mitochondrial
sufficiency test for years the only one
that i know is you get an exercise bike
breathing through a mask with a special
algorithm that analyzes what you're
doing to see how much energy you make
and how much oxygen was left over
there's no lying to that system right so
the studies show those numbers are
accurate so what that means is as we age
we get worse at using air and food to
make electrons whether it's to ride a
bike or to think a thought or to feel an
emotion all of those are driven by the
same exact electrons that are powering
your phone
and we unfortunately can't plug into a
usb cable to recharge yet that would be
a lot easier that's that's the next part
that would be a lot easier um so
if mitochondria are the source of aging
you threw out a couple things really
faster that we can do to protect against
that or to optimize our mitochondria
what does that look like
there's about a quadrillion mitochondria
in your body way more than there are
bacteria in your gut and way way more
than there are cells in your body so
your neurons in your brain have 15 000
mitochondria in one cell
and these things have their own little
unique consciousness cell level
consciousness like a bacteria would have
you know very basic things that they do
but it's become this elegant dance where
inside a neuron these mitochondria will
move back and forth and it'll break in
half and and they do stuff that is at
the very
very core of life so if we didn't
understand 20 30 years ago because we
couldn't see it we couldn't measure it
and
one of the things that they do is they
hang around even if they don't work very
well that means that if you don't
provide enough stress for them they will
not go to the biologically expensive
trouble of killing the weak ones and
replacing them with fresh young ones
interesting i didn't know that so it's
kind of like a cell in your battery
right you're in your tesla even in your
phone there's multiple cells in your
battery and if one of the cells goes bad
the battery the phone keeps working
doesn't charge quite as well two of the
cells go bad eventually enough the cells
go bad it only holds the charge for five
minutes you're in the hospital your
phone's getting replaced
well what if there was a weight say oh
the cell's going wrong let me kick that
cell out and grow a fresh new cell
that's what our bodies do
and
when you do things like fasting
and you just don't eat breakfast it's
not that hard or don't eat for a couple
days
when you do that all the cells that
cannot survive because they're freaking
out i don't mean your cells i mean the
cells within the cells the mitochondria
they'll actually die through a process
called autophagy
and when that happens
your body cleans out the dead ones and
you grow fresh new young ones but if you
never experience hunger because you're
living that donut life
then
you won't do that and if you get really
cold for a brief period of time
any cell that can't make enough heat
to keep you warm your body says oh an
ice age might be coming i better have
enough young cells that can make heat
and it gets rid of the cells all right
let's get real specific on both of those
and then we'll keep going but so
intermittent fasting what's your
protocol
so
bulletproof diet 2014 i talked about
doing a 16-hour window it turns out you
can and this has since been backed up by
several experts on autophagy you can
have bulletproof coffee
in the morning zero sugar zero protein
is important zero carbs so you're only
doing fat and coffee or just coffee or
tea a lot of people can't go for 16
hours i mean if you're like i was when
when i went 300 pounds
the idea of going without eating six or
eight meals a day is abhorrent because
you know you're gonna die and so
or you're saying okay i've got this
willpower i'm gonna do it and at 11 in
in the morning you're looking around
going everyone around me is a jerk like
i want to punch all these people i'm
going to make it to lunch but why is
everyone such a you know
that's not functional so a lot of people
they're starting it off with bulletproof
coffee because they're getting their
energy up right so i'm going to put that
in the realm of intermittent fasting i
call that one bulletproof fasting
shocking right
but i'm also very clear
the
amount of caffeine in two cups of coffee
doubles ketone production right so you
can have and that's just caffeine but
coffee itself has other benefits so you
can have two cups even a decaf if you
want to but calf works better in the
morning without any of the blood
pressure stuff in it and you're still
going to see a metabolic advantage from
doing that and if you
go for 16 or 18 hours of fasting for me
i skip breakfast and i have a late lunch
it works really well the recommendations
near exercise
before the late lunch because exercising
in a fasted state increases autophagy
increases stress on the cells the ones
who can't hack it get out of dodge and
you grow new ones
and
i'll tell you the data actually shows if
you want to be a circadian you know
great golden god you probably should
have breakfast in an early lunch and
then fast but you'll have no friends if
you do that so it's not worth it that's
literally how i live my life so i eat my
last meal at 2 p.m yep
and you have no friends it's perfect i
literally dave how'd you know
uh it is it does make it hard though um
how often do you
go days without eating
i would say twice a month i'll go a
couple days without eating and i've
experimented i i feel really good if i
go more than 48 hours so
you feel better oh yeah i feel great
when i'm fasting and i feel
really good when i'm done and here's the
kicker though if i'm going to go that
amount of time and i want to feel really
good and be able to write work out my
books and do projects i'm not going to
do working out during a two or three day
fast but i'll not have dinner on friday
and then
on saturday morning i'm gonna have
coffee but i'm gonna put a teaspoon of
brain octane in there which is a very
small amount different people have all
sorts of different debates about you
know how much of what makes it a fast
because the mice only had water
i'm just going to say look brain octane
specifically doesn't get stored as fat
and doesn't get metabolized by the liver
it goes around those things directly
into energy and you're doing a teaspoon
of it
i get the same results from that as i do
if i just drink black coffee but my
hunger levels are like way way lower so
i just feel nothing
does brain octane have uh calories it
does have calories yeah but different
calories do different things right sure
so this is a calorie that doesn't
require anything from the liver and it
doesn't require
any insulin in fact it will have no
effect on your insulin whatsoever and it
doesn't require any protease or any of
the protein digestion things so it
pretty much goes in and gets used as
energy and superhuman i call it one of
the energy fats where most fats get
stored as fat or have to get broken down
by the liver to become energy the energy
of building blocks this stuff doesn't do
that yeah with fast it's interesting so
the very first time i fast i did a
three-day fast and i had a brutal
headache the second night oh and i woke
up in the middle of the night my head is
pounding and i'm like i don't know if
advil has calories or not so i refuse to
take it um you know what it works
activated charcoal like i
never tried that oh it's one of the fact
it's the first supplement that that i
made for bulletproof and it's an ultra
fine one it helps with headaches it can
help with headaches if they're induced
by toxins and what happened is your gut
bacteria were getting really pissed off
they were making extra
lipopolysaccharides and you might have
been dehydrated you might have needed
magnesium and sodium and potassium but
what's most likely is you are pumping
out tons of lipopolysaccharides that are
making you feel bad so anyone who's
fasting i highly recommend take
activated charcoal because your body's
gonna be dumping toxins you might as
well absorb them in the gut and poop
them out instead of putting them into
your liver and letting your body
recirculate them when the liver doesn't
have glucose available for oxidative
destruction of toxins one of the reasons
you get a sugar craving if you eat a
food that has toxins in it or even moldy
coffee you get that sugar craving
because your liver is like god this is a
stressor i need energy right now it's
going to call on you to get that energy
so
when you're fasting absorbing toxins
transformative there are zero calories
at least digestible calories in charcoal
right
interesting yeah i've never tried
charcoal okay so now the cold thing so
what's your protocol for cold how long
and how cold
i have a cryotherapy machine at home we
put them in bulletproof labs so three
minutes of air that's chilled to 270
degrees below zero that's cold now we're
deficient but that's air okay this is
different than a cold shower cold shower
is like
right walking outside in shorts during a
snowstorm when you're warm is not that
big of a deal and cryotherapy is more
like that so i'm getting the signal into
my body it's a very strong signal in a
very short period of time you come out
you have like goose pimples but i'm i'm
not sure most people don't shiver if
they're healthy they shouldn't shiver
and i also went through a period of ice
baths i have a digitally controlled ice
bath that will hold the temperature
constant circulate the water and freeze
your butt off if you want to do that and
there's peripheral cold sensors that are
in the skin which cryotherapy with air
does and then there's stuff from cold
showers or ice baths which are the core
temperature receptors and the ones on
the skin and
it's arguable which one's better i know
which one takes less time and you get
similar results from both
a mouse research a study came out and
they show how much cold exposure and how
much time is necessary and it matches
exactly what i see in humans so i'm
going to say this one works for humans
as well just because it's the same
numbers right what i noticed from myself
and others you take a cold shower the
first day after eight seconds and by the
way the water hits you in the forehead
and the chest after eight seconds
you're like dave's a jerk and you jump
out of the shower and you're hitting
yourself in the head because your head
hurts right
and then you go back in the next day and
you're gonna be 20 30 seconds before you
do the same thing and the third day you
can do a minute and you come out guys i
still think dave's a jerk but it wasn't
that bad and the fourth day you get in
like this feels really good well what
changed in three days well the mouse
studies show that three days of brief
cold exposure changes the levels of
cardiolipin in the mitochondrial cell
membrane and cardiolipin cardiolipin and
it's one of the things that makes
mitochondrial membranes and all cells
their membrane is what
is what essentially allows some things
and allows some things out in
mitochondria the mitochondrial membrane
potential is what makes electrons
so what it's doing is it's making the
mitochondria work better and they shift
the amount of this compound that's in
the membrane to allow them to be better
at making electricity and that's why
after three days oh i can make enough
electricity to handle the cold whereas
before i couldn't do it
and that's why that three-day period of
swearing at
you for listening to this show is worth
it because on the fourth day like i feel
good but then you burn way more calories
throughout the day you feel better so
literally making the um mitochondria
more thermogenic
like what's why interesting questions
why would the response to cold be that
the only thing i can think is all right
my understanding of the difference
between traditional adipose tissue and
brown fat is that you have more dense
mitochondria which are able to generate
more energy which thusly creates more
heat and therefore you're able to keep
yourself more warm so that was sort of
always i thought more mitochondria are
being formed i didn't realize there was
actually something happening to that
mitochondria itself you will see a shift
over time to have more brown fat and
less white fat as the demand
on the body to instantly turn on lots of
heat goes up the body says okay let me
shape myself to an environment where i'm
required to turn on lots of heat quickly
so this is just a shift to match the
environment that your body thinks it's
in which is one where cold could happen
at any time
so the brown fat that mostly is along
your upper spine that will that will get
stronger and bigger and it has more
mitochondria but the rest of the
mitochondria throughout your body will
also shift their levels of cardiolipin
so what you're getting is more
mitochondria in the form of more brown
fat and you're getting better
mitochondria everywhere else
and the mitochondria that cannot make
enough heat
will get replaced and that's i think the
big win and the amount of time that it
takes to do that i don't know the amount
of time that it takes to grow a single
new mitochondria it's probably different
for different cells based on nutritional
availability but it's an interesting
question
yeah i used to get just dave ferociously
cold like i was cold all the time i was
like bundled up i had
i lost a ton of weight so i lost 60
pounds
but i did it really stupidly and i did
it through essentially rabbit starvation
i wasn't eating any fat no carbs 85
maybe a little more percentage of my
calories came from protein i was
basically eating boiled chicken breasts
and steamed broccoli all day every day
it's a crappy life isn't it oh my god it
was horrible it was horrible and finally
my wife and my business partners pulled
me aside and said dude you no longer
have a personality yeah like
it just sucked but i got super lean but
i
almost certainly did some sort of
cellular or metabolic damage and for
years after that i was so [__] cold
all the time yeah now that didn't change
until i started taking cold showers and
now i find that like
i'm just not that cold very often
anymore
so
i have definitely developed a resilience
to
cold did you ever your thyroid levels
checked i did not thought i paid
attention to it about that probably
happened is that something happened that
lowered your thyroid function which is
part of the reason you got fat because
your thyroid is the thermostat for all
your cells the mitochondria listen to
thyroid hormone to figure out what to do
and this is why in superhuman i talk
about the vegan trap
tell me more this is one of the more
interesting parts of the book and so i
was a raw vegan for a while i was cold
when i was raw vegan to come to think of
it um it's interesting but i got a lot
of other health issues i hadn't had
before even though i did lose some
weight on that but
what happens is
you say all right
based on an assumption
and the assumption is it's going to make
me healthy or it's going to be better
for the planet both of which are wrong
by the way
so
i did this and
what happens for the first six weeks is
the type of fat in your cell membranes
changes and it changes to match
vegetables newsflash we're not
vegetables so as that happens your body
says oh my ability to make energy just
went down i will compensate by turning
up my thyroid hormone but then at a
certain point your thyroid is turned all
the way up and then nothing
nothing's happening you're still making
enough energy and then you can get
thyroid problems including hashimoto's
which is a common problem of doing that
and
not to mention you're eating excessive
carbs just by definition because that's
what plants make mostly
and
the vegan trap there is this idea that
you feel great for six weeks the period
of time that it takes to make a new
habit is 40 days or maybe it's six weeks
which is 42 days and after that period
of time like look i felt better on the
vegan diet and you did you cranked up
your thyroid hormone so
now you feel good and
that can't be why i'm not feeling good
that can be why i'm getting cold but
that's the vegan trap it is that you you
were convinced it made you feel good
because it did so it can't be that and
you start looking at all these other
things well it's maybe because i'm not
vegan enough like i'm gonna cut out salt
right and like you just keep doing these
things trying to figure out why didn't i
recapture that initial glow and it's
because various biological systems are
turning off so for cleansing or whatever
yeah vegan for a little while it's great
the rest of the time you should be
pretty much 80 90 vegan with some of the
types of fat that you're made out of
which are saturated fats you don't get
the right ones from plants alone
and the amount of building block protein
that your body needs
things like collagen protein are
essential you do not need the amount of
animal protein that most people eat and
you should never eat industrially raised
animal proteins it's bad for them and
it's bad for the soil it's bad for the
earth and it's bad for your soul
depending on whatever soul belief
systems you have like nobody wins
when you crowd animals
so i will eat the vegan meal every time
or i'll fast before i'll eat the the
industrially raised feedlot animals it's
not okay
however
i have a small farm i raise sheep and
pigs and i eat them and they're
delicious and i don't eat a lot of them
because you don't need a lot of them and
the total deaths
per
calorie on the bulletproof diet which is
primarily vegetables which don't kill
anything grains actually do kill a lot
of things through habitat destruction
and just mechanized cutting down of
crops
so we have big problems there where a
tractor comes through and kills the
turtles the bunnies the ladybugs the
butterflies and destroys lots of crops
for you to get low yield calories from
these things
so what you probably need is
four ounces and maybe six ounces
of
meat
a day and not more than that and the
guidelines in superhuman that's for
normal people if you're a weightlifter
or you're over age 60 it's probably 0.6
grams per pound of body weight which is
way less than bodybuilders as long as
it's one or two grams
so you can really want to pound your
protein and what the studies are showing
is whether it's animal or plant protein
you don't want to overdo protein like
you did with the rabbit thing there if
you eat more than 20 percent of your
calories from protein it is going to
cause a four times higher increase in
all-cause mortality is that protein no
matter the source uh i know like sure if
it's fried and stuff like that oh no
the cooking of the protein really
matters but it actually matters based on
amino acid ratios okay so are you saying
20 whether it's plant or animal animal
protein is worse than 20 but if you eat
20 plant protein you're still not going
to get the benefits and you're going to
start having problems from it
so there are essential amino acids amino
acids they're the building blocks of
proteins so you can kind of look at
those they're letters in the alphabet
yep and then you string them together
and you get peptides which are protein
fragments and you see each peptide is a
word and when you put the words together
into a sentence that's a protein
right and so if you look at the
composition of letters that are in what
you eat there's ones that are required
for us to live called cysteine and
methionine and tryptophan so you must
have them or over time you'll starve
slight problem if you have too much of
them they lead to systemic inflammation
systemic inflammation is a sign of
mitochondrial dysfunction which means
they're making you older so your risks
for cancer and cardiovascular disease do
go up if you over consume animal protein
so then the logical say well don't eat
any of it then except for the fact that
you need those they're essential and
they're building blocks the good news is
that almost no one is going to be
protein deficient if they were to go
vegan it's not about protein you might
miss a few of your conditionally
essential ones but you would miss out on
things like collagen proteins including
diane tripeptides that really help you
to build the cartilage in your joints
and keep your skin working and the types
of fats that come in animals are very
important so what you end up finding is
all of us should be eating way less
animals but that doesn't mean we should
eat zero animals all of us should be
eating way more dairy fat but not more
dairy protein because that protein is
not the ideal protein for us you can
have some of it but you don't need too
much of it and you end up in this thing
where we've made these artificial
divides of that's a
plant-based protein therefore it's good
for you
or we could just say guys different
proteins do different things and you
should choose the right proteins whether
they come from a test tube whether they
come from an animal look at what the
protein is the source is less important
and then you look at the source and you
say okay which of these sources builds
our soil and makes for a healthy world
where there is diversity
and
i just having run
uh an organic farm that looks at
permaculture
i can tell you i can't eat grass but i
can eat the thing that ate the grass and
it's poop sure is good for the garden
right so we have this this ecosystem
where we all get along
and this is how it worked before there
were humans we had
a hundred million buffalo running around
in the u.s keeping our soil healthy as
part of that's their job was to go out
and fertilize things and it's it's very
interesting to watch how we we've taken
on these belief systems um that you know
nothing can ever die not paying
attention to the fact that when the
tractor came through and cut the bread
for your sandwich that you killed many
many creatures
and back when we had a health ecosystem
you could walk around behind the tractor
with a bag and pick up hundreds of frogs
and snakes you could have frog legs for
dinner every time they cut the grain
well now all the frogs are dead and
there's no more snakes because we have
monoculture everywhere but hey at least
we're not killing anything
[Music]
how do you really feel dave
let me ask you what do you think about
the carnivore diet
i did something similar to that when i
was testing out like the edges of the
bulletproof recommendations
i
did
one serving of vegetables a day for
three months
right so it wasn't pure carnivore uh
because you know i did eat a little bit
of broccoli every day
it jacked me up really oh my god did you
transition though or did you just like
hammer over well i was already
you know doing keto and cyclical and
keto with uh meat or keto plant-based
okay with me okay yeah yeah you're
one of the few people i've heard like
really throw out some heavy warnings
about protein so keep going got it when
you say that it jacked you up here's
what it did yeah
i was tracking my sleep i've tracked my
sleeve for almost 15 years six hours and
17 minutes or something i'm so [__]
close to the truth what is six hours and
10 minutes but you're see come on seven
minutes off all right i'm going to give
you full credit
that that's pretty amazing
um
yeah and this is like for many years now
that much sleep and i my percentage of
deep and room keeps going up but during
that time i felt really good for the
first week or two and after that my
sleep i was waking up 10 to 12 times a
night without knowing it and i'd wake up
in the morning and look at my results
i'm like this is the worst sleep ever
what's going on and i had
like like a kind of a constant headache
and i got angry and i was my joints hurt
and it was not working and i was
really convinced okay we don't need any
carbs brother that's wrong you do need
carbs and i think what it did is tell me
more why do you say that because as of
this moment i don't believe that to be
true
tell me how i'm wrong um because the gut
bacteria that eat carbs benefit from
soluble fiber so if you're not getting
soluble fiber there's a little chapter
in here on that you can still be keto
and have soluble fiber but you've got to
have something to feed certain species
of gut bacteria so they can do stuff now
if you go back a bulletproof diet was
the first book in the entire genre that
talked about how collagen can be
used in the gut to make butyric acid so
maybe my problem was i was eating too
many ribeyes and i wasn't eating enough
collagen when i was doing my my diet
there
i've interviewed steve omahundro
this is a guy who's a leader in
artificial intelligence creating a
global brain who came down
with um
cancer in his blood
and he'd been fighting it for a long
time with and it was he was slowly going
down when carnivore cured him completely
fixed and so he came on and talked about
those pictures of his freezer and things
it's all just meat so i'm a huge fan
just like i would say go vegan for a
month go carnivore for a month reset
your gut bacteria
i actually have questions about the
sustainability
of eating only grass-fed meat and i know
if we took most of our golf courses and
turn them into grass-fed meat production
facilities i.e farms we can handle a lot
more than we do but we're just eating
too much meat as a species so as a brief
intervention to cure yourself
i i'm in huge support of it but you
better do nose to tail and
being the guy who has learned how to
take our lambs down you know how to how
to take them down as in i haven't like
i've learned at a butcher shop how to do
it there's a lot of stuff in there that
you're supposed to be eating that you
don't
and the idea here is you need to get the
skin you need to get the organs and
things like that if you're going to go
kind of so there's there's a case for it
there are people who've done it for many
years successfully
i think it's very expensive very
limiting and probably bad for the planet
and may be good for you but
i'd want some more evidence
all right give me some rapid fire things
that are going to help me be superhuman
green tea
black coffee
dark chocolate blueberries
sleeping like a professional even if you
get less sleep give me some of your
sleep tips like is it timing obviously
light you're like [__] synonymous
with blue blocking yeah i i did make
those kind of cool
i
i have a company called true dark just
full disclosure i founded the thing but
if i don't wear my glasses before bed
for at least an hour i do not get the
one and a half to two hours of deep
sleep that i expect in six hours if this
is even if the lights are dim and it it
doesn't matter it really matters if i
travel it matters even more so i landed
last night i got to my hotel around
midnight
and i got my hour and 40 minutes of deep
sleep last night in a hotel after
landing and coming in that i could never
do that ever that's amazing
that's the glasses but for dreaming it's
been a real problem getting enough rem
sleep for me for years has been an issue
and there's a company called life cycle
that makes an australian lion's mane
mushroom extract i had the guys on the
show they went really deep on the
science and i've lions main is well
known for it's cognitive enhancing
properties um this stuff for sleep
though
uh is something that that that has
worked for me and i can tell you if i
don't i do a lot i do five droppers of
it if i do that i get my hour and a half
of rem and if i don't i'm going to get
30 minutes
the other things that work aside from
dark and that lowering the temperature
of the room
for people wake up late like three or
four in the morning can't go back to
sleep racing thoughts that's a cortisol
and a fueling issue before bed you need
either raw honey or
collagen or mct oil brain octane or
maybe all three and there's different
pathways raw honey not in hot water
because it's not raw anymore it raises
liver glycogen but not
muscle glycogen and we're talking a
small amount it stabilizes it so you
don't get a blood sugar crash brain
octane provides ketones which are the
backup energy supply for the brain to
pump itself out at night
and for some people the amino acid
glycine that's present in collagen can
be calming and help them sleep through
the night i do those i take the sleep
mode supplement i formulated blackout
curtains are a necessity at this point
raising the head of your bed by six
inches there's really good evidence that
that's going to change blood flow
dynamics and cerebral spinal fluid
dynamics in the brain and make it easier
for your brain to drain stuff out that's
interesting so literally put a couple
bricks under the head of your bed
it's pretty easy to do that and it's a
one-time hack that can have ongoing
benefits
what about red and amber light
amber light is good amber light in fact
true light one of the parts of true dark
we make a light that uses amber for like
blood vessel formation in the skin along
with collagen regeneration
and so there's usefulness for that
during the day you usually see me
wearing yellow glasses that block some
blue light but not all because you need
blue light during the day so amber light
as a therapeutic wavelength on the skin
it works on blood vessels
mostly and on fine wrinkles
red light and infrared light also work
on fine wrinkles on collagen
regeneration on tissue regeneration and
if you're looking to use an amber light
at night it turns out blue blocking
isn't enough to make you go to sleep
there's four kinds of light that mess
with your sleep and blue blockers only
get one of the four so your melatonin
will go out but the other three are
still there so you need to block all
four that's why the sleep glasses are
different than blue blocking
so you see a lot of people walking
around blue blockers during the day they
got no daytime signal at all so that's a
bad thing
but if you're walking around under
bright leds and staring your screen on
full power all day you're getting an
overwhelm of daylight signal so it's
about getting it getting it right but
for me it's that hour before bed where
you just have to nail it
and for looking younger red light
therapy is profound for the skin and
what what do you use for red light
therapy is there a device yeah there's a
variety of devices so you go to upgrade
labs we have you know the the
many tens of thousands of dollar whole
body thing you kind of roast on it with
systemic effects including you can
actually see your nitric oxide levels go
up on a
spit strip after you expose the red
light it has biological effects and then
it's kind of the mid-range of cost and
performance there's a company called
juve
and they have a very very powerful leds
in an array and then at the
most affordable end of things is the
true light stuff from the company i have
that makes the glasses they're more
affordable they have yellow uh they have
the red and they have the infrared but
they're not as powerful of leds so i
would say you got to look at your your
your price point where you want to go
what you want to do but it's an led
therapy kind of thing and you know jude
makes a little box you can take with you
and there's panels you can string
together
the bottom line is if you're feeling
weird in your stomach and you have
nausea or you have a headache and you
put red light on your stomach or on your
head it's shocking what happens there's
studies of putting red light in
conjunction with ketosis and they looked
at somewhere in minnesota they looked at
say a dozen people they put them on a
strict keto diet
they put them on red light therapy with
a stroke keto diet and a standard diet
and red light therapy of the standard
diet and the men who were on
keto plus red light therapy had a
doubling of testosterone production
but keto alone and red light alone both
bumped it up but nowhere near as much so
there's synergistic effects between keto
and red light which is really cool is
there a timing of that
like when do you want your red light in
the morning and the night um generally
you just think of sunset and sometimes
okay so you would do when you wake up
two before bed and during the day if you
if you have time you know and you're
looking at skin repair or something you
can do it any time during the day but
the two peak periods are before bed and
upon waking nice
all right man there is a lot more in
this book you are a very easy man to
find online but where's your ideal for
people to connect with you where's your
ideal for people to snatch up the book
go to
daveasprey.com and this is my author url
you can clearly go to bulletproof.com
pick up all the cool bulletproof stuff
i've put most of my blog posts and all
the podcast transcripts and all that
kind of stuff on daveasper.com go there
and if you send me your receipt from
picking up superhuman um there's eight
interviews with like the leading gods of
anti-aging that are just for people who
picked up the books i'm really serious
about this
building a community around people that
do the stuff that has been a non-profit
activity for me for 20 years that's now
becoming my primary focus nice man
what's one change that you would have
people make that would take them the
farthest towards becoming superhuman
this is going to sound really really
lame it's probably sleep today it
doesn't sound lame to me i mean i like
to tell you you should meditate or you
should you know make sure that you're
not eating toxins it all it's
synergistic but seriously if you just
learn to get better sleep in whatever
time you have to sleep it is the most
leveraged return on investment and it's
probably also the cheapest thing you can
do so that and maybe learning some
breathing exercises is a pretty good
deal nice i like it it's good advice
guys this is somebody who literally puts
out good advice for a living if you're
not already following him on one of the
many platforms that he's active on you
definitely want to check out the book it
really is interesting and offers a whole
host of things you can be doing to
better your life and speaking of
bettering your life if you haven't
already be sure to subscribe and until
next time my friends be legendary take
care
thank you guys so much for watching and
being a part of this community if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe
you're going to get weekly videos on
building a growth mindset cultivating
grit and unlocking your full potential